take back your health now episode 85
information contained in this podcast is
not medical advice it is for educational
and informational purposes only please
consult with your doctor before making
any health choices
you're listening to the take back your
health now podcast the show that
interviews the top doctors athletes
trainers and entrepreneurs to help you
find the holy grail of health now here's
your host dr. Dan Margolin
[Music]
this is doctor Dan Margolin with another
segment of take back your health now
where we pull out all the stops in
search of Health's Holy Grail today we
have a very interesting topic we're
going to be talking about cancer we've
got mr. Travis Kristofferson MS received
his undergraduate degree in molecular
biology from the Montana State
University Honors Program and a master's
degree in material engineering and
science from the South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology today's full-time
science writer and founder of a cancer
charity foundation for metabolic cancer
therapies he lives in South Dakota he
also wrote the book tripping over the
truth the metabolic theory of cancer mr.
Christopherson how are you sir good hi
dad
thanks for having me hey thank you so
much for being on the show so could you
explain to us well I guess we'll get
into a little bit how you got into this
but what is and the wording is a
metabolic theory of cancer what does
that mean yeah so so simply put when you
say metabolism all you're talking about
is a summation of all the sort of
chemical reactions ago under the in the
body in the cell and the main topic
people think of when you say metabolism
is energy metabolism and so the
difference between the sort of dogmatic
theory of cancer which is called the
somatic mutation theory and the
metabolic theory cancer is the somatic
mutation Theory contends a cancer is
driven by specific mutations to key
genes it's a genetic disease it's pretty
much random it's a cause of bad luck
there's not much we can do about it the
metabolic Theory contends a cancer is
more driven by damage to these little
organelles in the cell cigar-shaped
organelles that generate 90% of the
energy in the cell they're called
mitochondria and the cancer is triggered
by that and then driven by sort of an
epigenetic change where there's
perfectly intact genes no mutations are
necessarily required for cancer to be
precipitated now what does the word
epigenetics what does that mean so
epigenetics literally may mean that the
root word is on or above genetics and
that describes it very well so you
inherit in your DNA you have about
20,000 genes
and epigenetics is just how those genes
how those 20,000 genes get turned on and
turned off in a very easy way to
visualize that is a neuron is a cell
which is very different than say a liver
cell and those two those two cells
translate different genes so the genes
for for the liver function are turned
off in the neuron and vice versa and
that is all done through these
epigenetic regulation understood
understood so let's let's sort of take
it back how did you get into researching
cancer just take us back to the sort of
the fundamental story and then how did
you start writing the book etc you know
for me it was just a collision of lots
of things I was doing a class on in
graduate school on cancer theory and I
you know my undergraduate degree was
biochemistry molecular biology and I was
pre-med and so I learned what everybody
else learned about cancer about the
genetic component somatic mutations and
I picked up this book just happened to
click buy on the Kindle if I wouldn't
have done that I never would have wrote
in the book but it was a book called
cancer as a metabolic disease by Tom
Seyfried and in that book it's a you
know this beautiful comprehensive huge
book written like a textbook laying out
this argument for this metabolic theory
of cancer and I had no idea that there
was you know over a hundred years of
research that laid out this theory and
made it this very viable comprehensive
theory so you know it was I've always
dabbled in writing and at that point it
was a really rich story because it goes
back to this guy named Otto Warburg who
was sort of chastised brilliant
scientists and he he was the first to
propose this metabolic theory but he was
sort of chastised for it later in his
career so it was kind of the scientific
Redemption story it had this kind of
beautiful narrative arc so I that goes
back to way back when to Einstein is
that is that in the same time period
exactly yeah those those guys were
operating in the 20s and actually Albert
Einstein and Otto Warburg very good
friends and you know it's interesting
time back then those guys they were very
coveted in Germany and in most of Europe
they didn't have to ask for grant money
they were just sort of showered with
these resources
really yeah otto warburg he he was
widely considered the most brilliant
physiologist biochemists at the day in
the early 20th century and he actually
went off and fought it was when World
War one was fighting on the Russian
front
and Einstein wrote him a letter saying
you know your job could be served by a
common man you are your humanity is much
better served if you're back here in the
laboratory and convinced him to come
back and then during World War two
he was part Jewish he would have been he
would have had to flee but Hitler was
terrified of cancer his mama died of
cancer and so he knew that Otto Warburg
was worlds you know foremost expert in
cancer so he allowed him to stay and
kept his laboratory intact oh my god
isn't there something with a Krebs cycle
coming from that laboratory the research
is that is that my wrong on that er no
no that's that's how you know the rich
history of all this it what it was is
hans krebs yeah i can't remember the
number in nobel prizes that came out of
Warburg's lab but Hans Krebs was a
student of Warburg and Hans Krebs was
the one that came up with the krebs
cycle you know although all that
fundamental biochemistry sort of came
out of that era okay that I knew them
back some of my classes I remember some
of this information that is crazy so
when we're talking about what we're
actually talking about somebody that was
not well renowned I mean so what he's
talking about this as a as a as a theory
I mean it definitely has some validity
to it yeah you know it just if you look
at the sweep of history you see what
happened he Warburg had good evidence
for metabolism and there was others too
that showed that the metabolism and the
cytoplasm all these epigenetic factors
were very important in cancer but when
you look at the you know the arc of
history what happened was DNA was
discovered and it was known that there
was mutations and cancer cells so
everybody focused on that and that's
where all the research went went into
and so Warburg's theory and and the you
know anything that had to do with the
metabolic theory of cancer was sort of
swept aside okay and it's kind of you
know obviously it's made this you know
astounding research
Jen says it lately well it's true
whenever you see a lot of these cancer
institutes advertised on television they
still purport this sort of genetic
mutation thing where I've seen where
they're targeting your specific genetics
is that proving not to be true is that
what you're saying
so that's exactly right the era of
targeted medicine began really in the
80s and people thought that we would
cure cancer by targeting these genetic
lesions within cancer cells and various
drugs have come up that do that for
example Herceptin is one that targets
the hair to gene of breast cancer
Gleevec targets the Philadelphia
chromosome and certain kinds of leukemia
and there's been a few success stories
and now you can debate the reason why
their success stories is can circle you
can show that it actually circles back
to metabolic functions so it's not it's
not always clear-cut that you're
targeting the driving force behind
cancer in many of these cases but by and
large these targeted medicines have been
a a dismal failure they really haven't
moved the needle on cancer death rates
there's a few it's just interesting to
me though that when you speak to the
general public they don't they're not
aware of this yet am I wrong I mean it
just seems like they're still thinking
that cutting edge is going to be the
concept of this genetic propensity
yeah and that gets you know that gets
sort of propagated in the media you hear
the next breakthrough a cancer is always
around the corner and you hear you know
targeting Jeannette it sounds beautiful
targeting genomics sequencing and and
and there's a lot of inertia you know
there's a lot of money behind all these
projects and so it's hard to move the
ship it's like trying to change the
direction of the Titanic but I think the
general public has got a good sense that
cancer we haven't made the breakthroughs
that were promised not even close
it's still it's still set to pass heart
disease as a number-one killer in the
Western world and there's been huge you
know huge strides forward in
cardiovascular diseases and most other
diseases while cancer the death rates
have remained very stubborn so I think
you know in the back of most people's
minds regardless what they read in the
media they know that something is not
right
well you know I interviewed talking
about cardiovascular disease I
interviewed uh dr. Stephen Guthrie's the
chief cardiovascular surgeon at Loma
Linda hospital and he for the most part
stopped doing a lot of the bypass
surgeries when he recognized that it was
actually a nutritional problem and that
when they changed the diet of these
individuals they were able to reverse
you know many of these cardiovascular
diseases the plaques and stuff like that
are you saying that we're finding that
really we're sort of going back it's
almost like we are going back to a
concept that people knew about many
years ago yeah you get back to the
fundamentals right and and that's going
back to nutrition you know that you can
prevent so many ailments just by having
the right nutrition and cardiovascular
disease is a great case of that and
there's a beautiful theory by Bruce Ames
that called the triage theory and it
kind of explains very well for
cardiovascular what we're talking about
is vitamin K is involved in blood
clotting but it's also involved in it's
a cofactor in about 15 different enzymes
and so your body well your the enzymes
that represent the most immediate need
will take that vitamin out of your
bloodstream and use it right away so
blood clotting obviously is an immediate
need right it'll bind preferentially to
vitamin K we're down the list towards
the end of the 15 is the enzymes
involved in calcium regulation and that
taking the calcium out of your arteries
so it doesn't get deposited which leads
to heart disease so if you don't have
enough vitamin K it will get used by
these by these immediate enzymes first
and you'll have a low-grade deficiency
you know you don't know that but it's
manifests over years and decades it's
just you know arterial calcification
which leads to heart disease so it's
that simple to love just topping off
your your vitamins and minerals in the
right ratios is critically important for
every you know everything Chris our show
is in search of hence Holy Grail and and
we've interviewed so many people now and
I'm really becoming more more fascinated
that no matter what area we're looking
at it's always coming back to new
I mean it just seems to be like really
what I'm funny is the holy grail of
health is within that realm and and
shockingly even in cancer now where I
was I was actually always taught that
some of this is genetics and that's
really where the answer is gonna lie I'm
just like stunned could you go into just
any kind of studies that I a little bit
in your book you go over like the
studies were they I think they took the
nucleus out of normal cells and switched
them with cancer so could you go into
that a little bit
yeah and I'll just I'll add one more
thing to nutrition also if you have a
low grade deficiency in B vitamins B
vitamins or cofactors for DNA repair
enzymes and and DNA damage certainly can
trigger cancer you can argue back and
forth about what fundamentally it's
doing there but a deficiency and B
vitamins in mice you'll see all these
breakages within the chromosomes
chromosomes actually physically break
so that's chromosomes for just the
listeners so chromosomes are just your
genetic luggage that you inherit from
your parents you get 40 23 from your mom
23 from your dad and those are where all
your genes reside and that's what makes
you you that's your operating manual and
so that those can actually be broken up
by a lack of nutrition right right yeah
and so back to your other question yeah
there was a beautiful series of
experiments called nuclear transfer
experiments that were done in the 80s
and again largely ignored just because
of the time everybody was focused on the
genes and they're very you know they're
simple to understand when you explain
them at all that all the researchers did
was take the nucleus of a cancer cell
and transfer it into a normal cell grow
the cells in a petri dish and then
inject them in mice now if cancer was a
purely genetic disease caused by genetic
mutations those would all be transferred
into this normal cell and you'd think
that you'd have cancer when you injected
them the mice almost none of the mice
got cancer so then they flip the
experiment it took the nucleus of a
normal cell and put it into a cancer
cell with its nucleus removed so now you
have a cancer cell all the cytoplasmic
variables with its nucleus removed and a
normal nucleus and
with no genetic lesions again they grew
these cells in a petri dish and injected
them the mice and over 90% of these mice
developed cancer
believed no when you're talking about
CentOS so you have a nucleus and it's
surrounded by cytoplasm what is in that
cytoplasm so the cytoplasm is full of
all the cellular organelles you know you
probably most of listeners probably
remember back to high school biology
like the mitochondria the Golgi
apparatus all these little functional
organelles are in the cytoplasm and
we've underestimated the power of the
cytoplasm all through history it's
always surprised that's how important
the cytoplasm is from the cloning of
Dolly nobody knew that if you took a
intact old you know from a nucleus from
an adult cell and put it into an egg
cell you could clone you could reset
those promess ohms back to time zero and
again unfurl this program of
embryogenesis and create a life and
that's all driven by these cytoplasmic
factors so all these various things in
the cytoplasmic transcript and factors
epigenetic modulators they're wildly
important to our health and when they've
been underestimated throughout all of
our tenure you know with with science so
that experiment basically is proving
that whatever is going on with cancer
it's in the cytoplasm it's in the
mitochondria it's in these golgi
apparatus you know that very exactly
very beautiful except it's you know enix
capable conclusion that something in the
cytoplasmic can drive cancer it's not
just it's not just nuclear DNA in
mutations to DNA there's something in
there deriving cancer so don't I see so
many theories of cancer no matter where
you look everybody's got a different
theory a different concept this kind of
an experiment would tend to me to
actually narrow the field a great deal
has it done that has it gotten the
attention it deserves it is starting to
now you know it didn't again these were
done in 87-88
and I've interviewed the researchers at
Didem many times and they were just
befuddled that the n/a NIH committees
didn't they didn't even fund further
research and the committee's the
committees were like you know these
these can't be right this data cannot be
right there's no way that their
cytoplasmic factors that drive cancer so
it just sort of died in the vine and
they you know they were just again they
were befuddled by their reaction to it
and it would have changed the history of
cancer people would have paid attention
but it gives it Seyfried that actually
brought this back up like how did this
come back up to that i think tom is
responsible for bringing this back into
light he highlighted all these
experiments in his book and i
highlighted them in my book and now
people are talking about them and
they're they're getting more and more
attention people want to repeat them so
yeah I think there is a fundamental
shift in the way cancer is being
perceived now Wow so let's jump into the
the mitochondria a little bit so it does
seem that within that cytoplasm you have
the mitochondria that within there may
live the key to cancer oh the way the
mitochondria is functioning versus and
anaerobic where it's it's lacking oxygen
versus aerobic folks could you go over
that a little bit yeah yeah the
mitochondria you know they're they're
absolutely incredible and we wouldn't be
here without them there alone what
caused multicellular organisms to to
evolve there absolutely you know they
have their own DNA and that's what
happened we were back billions of years
ago we were single bacterial cells and
mitochondria actually were a free living
bacteria that came inside of a cell and
established themselves and then over
time they became responsible for
generating energy and they transferred
all of their DNA to the nucleus so
there's about 2,000 genes within our
twenty within our 46 chromosomes that
our mitochondria that were transferred
over time so there's this constant
crosstalk between our genetics our
normal genome and the mitochondria and
so they're absolutely you know
astonishing important to our overall
health and biology they create all of
the energy that you know with a
minute-to-minute we require the energy
that they create
and so there's a real focus on just
maintaining mitochondrial health and the
predominant theory of aging is called
the mitochondrial theory that contends
it that as mitochondria sort of become
less functional as we age that's what
causes our overall decline so the big
push is how do you maintain
mitochondrial health and now you know
there's various ways to do that fasting
has come forth is a very good way to
restore mitochondria there's this
process called etapa G or defunct
mitochondrial proteins that even whole
mitochondria will be digested by the
cell and then new mitochondria will be
take their place now you would see this
so fasting actually increases this cycle
it does yes it causes again it digests
all the sort of defunct proteins and
even the whole mitochondria and so
you'll get this sort of rejuvenating
you know that these new mitochondria
will take their place so it's a very
rejuvenating thing with regard to
mitochondria Wow now with with
mitochondria when you look at a cancer
cell how how does the mitochondria there
differ from that of a healthy cell yeah
lots of debate in that and that's
contentious debate so just in general
when you look at the mitochondria of a
cancer cell under an electron microscope
or analyze their lipid profiles they're
very distorted they're shaped
differently their lipids are all broken
their proteins are expressed right
there's less of them typically in the
more metastatic aggressive tumors
there's about 50 percent of the normal
content of mitochondria then you see in
a normal healthy cell so a cancer cells
will shift from this aerobic metabolism
mitochondria and make energy with oxygen
so it's called aerobic Li and cancer
cells will shift away from that and
generate energy anaerobically and and
sort of bypass the mitochondria so
there's tons of debate why this is going
on are that mitochondria actually
damaged or it does the cancer cells sort
of pivot away from them and then they
become damaged that's all being sorted
out but there's no doubt that the cancer
cell has shifted from mitochondrial
metabolism and if you can restore that
it's been shown that if you can
or that metabolism in cancer cells you
can sort of dialogue the cancer cells
into behaving normally doing the right
thing which is called something called
apoptosis committing cell suicide and
the cancer cells will kill themselves so
there's weight you know the kind of the
way to do that the low-hanging fruit is
a sink called the ketogenic diet
combined with hyperbaric oxygen as being
sort of a powerful tool to try to
restore that metabolite what is the
ketogenic diet like what exactly would
you eat in it and a die like that and
how would that work yeah it's old diets
been around since of 20s there's
actually standard of care for epilepsy
back in the 20s and it's a remarkable
diet what it is it's the maintaining the
fasting state through dietary
manipulation so nutritional ketosis is
just shifting away from carbohydrates so
you you eat almost no carbohydrates very
few and towards fat and when you consume
fat and there's no carbohydrates to burn
your body's force to make these
molecules called ketone bodies to
replace circulating glucose and these
these molecules have extremely
interesting properties they burn a lot
with more thermodynamic energy so they
create more energy within the cell and
they also have all these interesting
epigenetic properties where they sort of
even change the architecture of how
genes are expressed so there's the tons
of research in the EPI and the ketogenic
diet for lots of different disease
process including neuro degeneration
brain from Alzheimer's and cancer of
course Wow such so you would avoid all
carbohydrates where would you get the
fats from like what would be the the
best source of that you know and there's
a lot of debate and that which fats are
the most healthy I think there's still
most a lot of people say the debates
over saturated fats are fine but in
general you know you want to stay with
quality fats grass-fed meats grass-fed
butters olive oils things like that you
know you don't stay away from seed oils
and things like that that are highly
inflammatory you want to ship the ratio
of omega-3s to omega sixes
from typical Western diets about
twenty-six mega sixes to 1 Omega 3 you
want to shift it to about 1 to 1 ok yeah
Wow and Omega Omega 3 would be found in
what Omega 3 is in of course it's in
fish and you can supplement with fish
oil but if you have grass-fed beef you
know you shift the the omega-3 profile
gets much higher in grass-fed meats as
opposed to regular grain fed meats so
that just doing that alone and then
staying away from seed oils which are
very heavy and in omega sixes you'll
start to change your and that's a
classic of you know there isn't more
anything more true than you are which
you read especially with fats because
your cell membranes will be made up of
those fats and when they're made up of
omega threes you change the way the
immune system operates all of a sudden
when omega-3s get converted into these
cytokines and prostaglandins they affect
the way the immune system functions and
it's turns down all these inflammatory
responses Wow so so really everything is
starting to shift over to the ketogenic
diet and the hyperbaric oxygen now again
that's because the mitochondria or the
cells function better in an aerobic
environment and the cancer cells
function better in an anaerobic
environment where they're lacking that
oxygen exactly right and ketones have to
be burned aerobic Li that's the thing
about carbohydrates can be burned
anaerobically and so when you look at a
cancer cell for example just imagine a
PET scan which is how you image cancer
and the way you do a PET scan is you
inject the patient with radio labeled
glucose sugar and the cancer cells will
preferentially just take up that sugar
because they're voraciously burning that
you know that blood sugar and aerobic Li
and so when you shift you to ketone
metabolism they cannot be burned
anaerobically they have to be burned
aerobic Li so you're starving the cancer
cells are the fuel that they that they
prefer wow this is fascinating this is
really what I really love about this is
that you really are validating a lot of
things that you've seen sort of the
alternative
of of cancer therapies when you speak to
people that for years have been counting
this you know what I mean like yeah I've
spoken with many people have spoken with
G Edward Griffin about laetrile vitamin
b17 I've spoken with other people about
just even the acidity of your blood like
taking keeping your blood more basic is
there anything regarding that that you
could speak to you know honestly I have
not the the pH the acidity of the blood
I have not looked into that enough to
know and I have some you know those all
those things to change for example the
acids in our digestive system are
actually critical for for making the for
butyrate making the right molecules in
our digestive system so and our blood is
well buffered so I can't speak to the
general acidification of the body and
what that means if you're looking at
people that are listening to this or one
looking at preventing cancer or to have
some sort of a diagnosis with cancer how
would speak to them what would be ways
that they could I guess best protect
themselves
yeah prevention you know I think it's
very well we can say with confidence
that prevention if you just avoid a high
a bad diet that's high in carp cheap
carbohydrates and sugar you're going to
go a long way to prevent cancer and
again top off your vitamins you eat the
right the right micronutrients so you
just eat real food is is critical and we
know this because type-2 diabetes and
obesity is associated with higher rates
of cancer and you can see this on a
cellular level when you feed a cell too
much sugar it begins shifting the
genetic expression towards this
cancerous phenotype so that that's kind
of a low hanging fruit that you can tell
people with regard to prevention and
again that this lost sort of you know
knowledge of fasting that so many
cultures have done throughout history is
again making this kind of resurgence is
a sort of renewal thing that we can do
as far as prevention for many disease
processes can they say as far as fasting
are you better off doing short bursts of
fasting or
over a longer period of time any
research in that area yeah and again
there there's debate back and forth and
I would just yeah I would leave that to
the science what what's gonna work best
I do not know at this time but you know
most people can pull off a day or a two
day fast pretty easily safely sure so
that's a good place to start longer ones
I'm not so sure I don't know I haven't
looked into the date on real long fasts
and if it's got some danger involved or
not but just in terms of cancer as a
general public is it increasing cancer
diagnoses are increasing we have made
some strides you know and this was this
is what happened during the 80's 70's
and 80's we did make big strides in
cancer with combinational chemotherapy
you know we knocked off Hodgkin's
disease testicular disease we were
making big strides in treating cancer at
that point however it was completely
counterbalance by new diagnosis so we
made our world more carcinogenic during
those decades people were getting cancer
at higher rates whether it was chemicals
or diet we don't know for sure but yes
cancer diagnoses are increased we've
gotten better treating it again
diagnosis is getting better but those
tend to be offset by more by more in
earlier diagnosis yeah unbeliev so the
environmental factors clearly have
affected people in this area yeah yeah
diet environmental things in our food
and water all those things yes so
towards the end of the show we you know
our whole goal is to sort of search for
the holy grail of health if I were to
pose to the question what do you
consider to be the holy grail of health
what would that be sir oh man I let you
know pretty on the spot the most the
most bang for your buck for the general
general masses you have to go back to
justice low-hanging for her to pay
attention to what you eat because nature
provides you with everything you need
all these you know the polyphenols the
vitamins and minerals and the exact
right ratios and when you tinker with
those ratios especially with minerals
you're doing yourself a huge disservice
because you're distorting the way the
enzymes are operating so just you know
and I'm not anti supplement if you do it
right but be careful with supplements
especially minerals and and just eat
good fruit and study after study and and
fiber pay attention your microbiome
study after study has shown this is the
best way to mitigate you know a host of
disease processes awesome Travis
Jefferson how would people that want to
learn more about you read your book how
they find out about you know I have a
foundation called the foundation for
metabolic cancer therapies it's doing
some interesting work this has got a
website have a new book coming out
probably in about six months on
epigenetics
so yeah on that I'll keep you posted on
the foundation to website awesome
awesome and what a powerful interview of
Travis thank you so much for joining us
- really appreciate it absolutely my
pleasure thanks Dan
this episode is sponsored by New Jersey
Foot & Ankle Center in ooredoo New
Jersey remember when you have a foot
problem you've got a foot doctor in the
family weekend and evening appointments
are available call us at 2 0 1 2 6 1 9 4
4 5 once again that's to 0 1 2 6 1 9 4 4
5 thanks for listening
check out the show notes over at dr.
dance Pete's calm if you're loving the
show head over to iTunes and leave us a
review and we'll catch you next time